[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Let me know when I'm ready.
>> Yep, we're ready.
>> Oh.
When I went into psychiatry in
1950, fortunately not knowing
anything, but one
of the conditions
was as a part of my
offer for the job,
I would have to
learn psychiatry,
which is fair enough.
1950, we had no treatment for
any of the major psychosis.
The only treatment was
to lock them up forever.
We had no treatment.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We don't really understand at
a deeper level that we are what
we eat.
And I usually say to people,
you know, you look down
at your dinner plate.
And what you see doesn't appear
like the raw material for hair
or skin or teeth or nails.
But that's exactly what it is.
We are just food
recycling machines.
>> People don't take care
of themselves for one reason
or another.
And they come to
the doctor expecting
to be kind of bailed out by
taking a medicine, a chemical,
in order to treat the disease.
>> I mean, if we look
back at the last 30 years,
Homo sapiens is in a
really sorry state.
There is no question that
there has been an increase
in mental health problems.
And the World
Health Organization
say that mental health problems
have become the major area
of health concern.
>> Psychiatry is very much
dominated by the pharmaceutical
industry, especially
at this time.
In fact, almost all of
medicine is dominated
by pharmaceutical companies.
It has virtually no emphasis
on nutrition, on lifestyle,
on any of those things.
Everything is
supposed to be solved
by the use of
psychotropic drugs.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In 1950, we used to
lock them up forever.
In 2007, we lock them up
with their drugs forever.
There's no difference.
They said they may be worse
off today because they're also
being destroyed.
Their body chemistry
is being destroyed
by the modern drugs, which
didn't happen nearly so much
with the old drugs.
>> And we'd see some of the
worse things were sleepless
nights, the visions of demons in
the bedroom window when I tried
to sleep.
Just awful, like nightmares
at their worst, as I remember,
the hopelessness.
I remember going through
libraries looking for answers
to mental illness,
schizophrenia, madness,
insanity, manias of all kinds.
There were no answers.
>> So, I can sort of remember
my first session with Dr.
Hoffer was very straightforward.
He said, oh, you
have schizophrenia.
And I went, I do?
And I actually had a
name for what I had.
It was-- and he said,
do you hear voices?
Well, yes, I do.
Nobody's ever asked
me that before.
I guess they were
just such a part of me
that I didn't realize
that I had voices
until Dr. Hoffer asked me that.
You know, are people
talking about you?
And well, yeah, I hear people
talking about me all the time.
And it makes me really nervous.
And you know, just,
it's hard to deal with.
>> In the past 60 years,
psychiatry has made little
progress in the treatment
of mental illness.
Some might say no
progress at all.
New pharmaceutical treatments
are not very different
from the chemical
straightjackets of yesteryear.
What other treatments
are available?
Not much if you stick
to the mainstream.
Can there be a better way
to help the mentally ill?
This story is about a
biochemical approach
to schizophrenia.
But it applies to
every one of us.
Can it be that our thoughts,
moods, and behaviors depend
upon what we've had to eat?
Abram Hoffer was born
a few miles south
of Weyburn, Saskatchewan.
His parents were Austrians
of Jewish descent
who had come to Canada
with agricultural vision.
By the time young
Abram came along,
the Hoffer family farm
was doing very well.
Abram, however, preferred
school work to farmwork.
In school, Abrams studied
the pellagra epidemic.
Pellagra killed
100,000 Americans
before its cause was discovered.
It was caused by a deficiency
of niacin, also known
as vitamin B3.
The US government mandated
the enrichment of flour
with iron and B vitamins,
which ended the pellagra
epidemic in 1938.
That was the same
year Abram Hoffer
got his Bachelor of Science
degree and turned 21.
He earned his PhD in
agricultural chemistry in 1944.
He became a medical
doctor in 1949.
Abram Hoffer was made head of
the psychiatric research branch
for the province of
Saskatchewan in 1950.
>> Psychiatry, by the way,
is what you might call--
it was a dumping ground.
Whenever a doctor ran
across a patient who
was either schizophrenic or
depressed or bipolar or senile,
they would then send
him on to psychiatry
who would then put him
into a mental hospital
or into an institution.
One of the main problems
in mental hospital
was that many of
these patients were
angry and excited and hostile.
The poor people were
terror stricken.
They were screaming.
They were shouting.
There was bedlam.
Bedlam was a good term for
any old mental hospital.
There was really bedlam there.
And the main thing was to get
people barbituates or sedatives
to try and relax them a bit.
>> Anti-psychotic or neuroleptic
drugs were discovered
in the 1950s.
Chlorpromazine was the
best known of these.
These drugs spread
like wildfire through
the psychiatric community.
>> And these drugs settled
them down very, very quickly.
It's amazing.
You could get a screaming,
shouting, crying patient.
And two days later, he's--
he's blah.
Now, he wasn't any better.
But he appeared to be better.
He was socially a lot better.
They couldn't think.
They couldn't reason.
They had no motivation.
They were slobbering sitting
in front of their TV.
They couldn't work.
They were hopelessly ill people.
And the only advantage was that
they weren't running around
in the streets crying.
They were being locked
up or kept at home,
and no one knew about it.
That was the situation
of psychiatry.
So we were put in charge of
all the failure in medicine.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Psychiatrists have become
a group that spend their time
looking at symptoms,
coming up with a label,
and prescribing a drug.
That's basically what
they do at this point.
It used to be-- when I
went through residency,
there was a lot of
emphasis on psychotherapy
and trying to help people
psychoanalytically,
or in psychotherapy.
But the point is that
psychiatrists really just
don't even do that anymore.
They basically are just
basically pill pushers
for the pharmaceutical industry.
I mean, to me, it's
almost like a brainwashing
of the medical profession
that this is the only way
to do things.
The pharmaceutical companies
support the medical schools
to a great extent.
They support the journals.
The first 50 pages of any
important medical journal
is taken up by advertisements
for various medications,
various drugs.
>> The large mental hospital at
Weyburn was one of the two main
mental hospitals
in the province,
and one of Hoffer's
chief responsibilities.
When it was built in 1920,
it was the largest building
in the commonwealth.
Over half the patients at
Weyburn were schizophrenic.
>> Dr. [INAUDIBLE],, who was
in charge of the whole unit,
he was in charge of
psychiatric services branch.
He was a very kind man.
He also had the idea that
the Quakers had in 1850.
And this was that, first of
all, you had to provide shelter.
Second, you have to
provide good food.
Third, you had to be
kind and sympathetic.
The Quakers in 1850 didn't
believe in doctors or nurses.
They would take insane
people, up to 12,
move them into a house
without nurses or doctors.
Their own people would run them.
And they would hold them there.
They'd be gentle to them, kind.
They'd work with them.
Every Saturday night, they'd
have a party and a dance.
And the staff would
dance with the patients.
It was really a very
humane situation.
>> We had 2,000
seriously ill people,
who obviously were in need
of anything we could do.
>> Humphry Osmond was
born in England in 1917.
Osmond studied psychiatry
while acting as an army surgeon
during World War II.
Later, with John
Smythies, he had
done some of the earliest
scientific research
with mescaline.
They noted that its
chemical compound was
similar to adrenaline, and
that mescaline's effects
on perception were similar
to schizophrenic symptoms.
Osmond came to work
at the Weyburn Mental
Hospital in 1952.
He introduced Aldous
Huxley to mescaline,
participated in a native
Canadian peyote ceremony,
and coined the
term "psychedelic"
while living in Weyburn.
>> We didn't feel we wanted to
make a great deal of money out
of these things.
We simply wanted to find things
that would help people not
get ill, which I, being rather
out of date and old-fashioned,
I felt was a good thing to do.
>> We are able to hold
our world constant.
For the schizophrenic
person, this constancy
breaks down, or
begins to break down,
which is worse because
of the uncertainty.
>> Schizophrenia is
characterized by abnormalities
in the perception of reality.
Distortions in perception
may affect all the senses--
sight, hearing, taste,
smell, and touch.
But it most commonly manifests
as hallucinations and delusions
or disorganized
speech and thinking.
>> You have a constant
noise, not always voices,
at least for me.
It was just noise.
It was just like every
noise is amplified.
And so you just want quiet.
You just want peace.
You just want to make it stop.
And there's no way
of making it stop.
You have voices telling you,
you know, you're just so stupid.
And you're just lousy.
And you don't deserve to live.
And you should just go
jump off that bridge.
Or why don't you
slit your wrists?
Or why don't you--
you know, you're
such a bad person.
Just this all negative,
negative, negative constantly
on you.
>> And Dr. Hoffer and Osmond
originally hypothesized that
there was a substance
that was capable--
that was found in
schizophrenics that
could distort reality
and affect their brain.
And they then isolated
something called adrenochrome.
They found that the
adrenochrome could actually
produce schizophrenic
symptoms, could cause
hallucinations,
delusions, and so on.
And adrenochrome is an
oxidized product of adrenaline.
And adrenaline often occurs
when you're under stress.
And people who have
the genetics for it
can then develop
these oxidized stress
hormones that are then capable
of actually poisoning a person.
>> If you had the right genes,
if you had the right genetic
structure-- now there's
evidence for that--
which would allow the
conversion of too much
adrenaline to
adrenochrome, which
was a hallucinogen in the
brain, that if this happened,
that this would act on the
brain as if they had taken LSD.
And they would then
become psychotic.
>> With adrenochrome, your
legs seem a very long way down.
Your clothes may
become uncomfortable.
And particularly,
if you are convinced
that something is wrong,
almost intolerable.
Small distortions can
be even more frightening
than large ones because
you can't be sure
that they are distortions.
And as tension mounts, so
does one's uncertainty.
>> Ours is a simple,
comprehensive hypothesis that
wasn't based upon chance.
We actually derived
our hypothesis
from very careful
observation that
would be made by Humphry Osmond
and John Smythies and myself.
That was our hypothesis.
Ours is the only rational
hypothesis there is.
The average psychiatrist will
not answer your question.
Ask him what causes
schizophrenia,
he says, I don't know.
They think it's biochemical.
They use the word biochemical.
But they don't understand
what that means.
Because when you load
someone up with a toxic drug,
you're not giving him a
biochemical treatment.
You are merely poisoning him.
And it's easy enough
to poison people.
That's no problem.
So there are no theories that
are acceptable except ours.
>> To offset the
effects of adrenochrome,
we turn to the cheapest, safest,
and most easily available
substance--
niacin, vitamin B.
>> We by that time knew that
niacin might protect the cell
against the effect
of adrenochrome.
So I decided that
we would try niacin.
>> It's 37 years
since I was ill.
I have recovered completely.
I always think of my
recovery as taking place
in about three weeks,
or 19 days to be exact.
The theory that Dr. Hoffer
has that the adrenals produce
this toxic
adrenalutin and that's
like LSD in the body,
that fits my story.
And I think my own part in
it was overdosing on sugar.
I love my sweets.
I wasn't aware.
I didn't really know that
sugar can affect my mind.
And he said, we'll put you
on the niacin and watch
what happens.
And I didn't have
any expectations.
But something happened.
I make recommendations for
vitamins or supplements
always in terms of
cleansing and building.
And I make
recommendations for diet.
>> It became mandatory for all
my patients that they would all
go onto niacin.
I used drugs too.
The vitamin didn't work fast
enough, and the drugs did.
So, the best solution
was to combine them.
So I'd start my patients
on the drugs, which
would help settle it
down very quickly,
help take away their
anxiety, their hostility,
their depression.
Start them on vitamins.
And we used the drugs as
you would use a crutch
for a person with a broken leg.
As soon as the leg is mended,
you throw away the crutch.
As soon as our
patients are mended,
we throw away the drugs.
And I think that's how
they ought to be used.
So, that's where we
get the recoveries
that we see by the combination.
This is what's called
orthomolecular.
>> Two-time Nobel Prize-winning
chemist Linus Pauling also
championed the use of
vitamins as treatment.
Pauling coined the term
"orthomolecular medicine"
in 1968.
The Greek "ortho" means correct.
So orthomolecular means
the right molecules
in the right amounts.
>> The medical profession
has been very hostile toward
orthomolecular medicine,
especially the psychiatric
profession.
I wasn't even aware
of it, of course,
until 1968 when Linus Pauling
published his very famous paper
in "Science" called
"Orthomolecular Psychiatry."
Pauling never accepted anyone's
word; he did his own thinking.
You know, Pauling was the
world's most famous scientist.
He had a double Nobel Prize,
one for his work with chemistry.
In fact, his work in chemistry
is the absolute basis
of all modern medicine.
He showed how molecules
react with each other.
>> They started using nutrients
to help people's heads,
feed your heads.
And lo and behold,
their whole body
got better because nutrients
don't just feed the head.
Nutrients feed the whole body.
And when you feed the body,
and the body gets healthier,
that feeds relationships.
And if you feed relationships,
then societies and cultures
improve.
And when they improve,
nations stop warring.
And when nations stop
warring, then you
can start taking care
of the planet again.
And so all of this
begins with nutrition.
>> It was literally only 200
generations ago we were all
hunters and gatherers.
We had no choice but to
eat everything organic.
Everything was whole.
And we would eat seeds
and fruits and vegetables.
All the animals we
ate were wild animals.
Wild animal has maybe 5%
of its body weight is fat.
Most of the animals we eat
today, even organic animals,
you're looking at 20%.
So, food has
phenomenally changed.
And now that we know how our
biology works in relation
to food, it would be surprising
if we hadn't changed how
we think, how we
feel, and our pattern
of diseases, which clearly
are escalating out of control.
>> The brain is very
particularly dependent
on nutrition because this
organ is two pounds in weight.
And yet it consumes 20% of
circulating oxygen, glucose,
and other nutrients.
And so if you like, I describe
the brain as a nutrient hog.
It's using up 10 times more.
It's 10 times more
metabolically active.
So where there's a
shortfall in diet,
and where that plate
contains stripped down,
ersatz food, then
of course, the brain
is going to be one of the
first places that's affected.
And now we can see from studies
those particularly depriving
the developing brain
in utero of nutrients
is leading to lifelong
health problems--
mental health and
physical health.
>> One of the problems is
the scale of food processing.
And many people think in
terms of grains and sugars
and how they have
been processed.
There's an interesting
historical element here
in that the ancient Romans knew
more about grain processing
than people did up until the
early part of the 20th century.
That knowledge had been lost
for almost two millennia.
We've caught up,
and we've probably
superseded what
the Romans had done
in terms of not just
refining grains, refining
sugars, refining and creating
all sorts of artificial fats.
And most people, unless they
are very mindful of what
they are eating,
are basically eating
in this sea of junk food.
The solution is
really very simple.
And I can't claim
credit for the idea.
But it's basically going
back to fresh foods,
avoiding almost
anything that comes
in a bottle, jar, can, or box.
>> These processed foods bring
about inflammatory conditions.
And these inflammatory
conditions
are associated with
all of the problems
that we have today, including
psychiatric conditions,
neurological conditions,
cancer, diabetes,
heart disease, and so on.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> And I believe that the
pharmaceutical companies do see
nutrient therapy and the use
of supplements and the whole
orthomolecular approach as
being a bit of a competitor.
And so that's part of it.
There's also a kind of
orthodoxy or a belief
in the medical school
training that anything
that has to do with
nutrition is always
going to border on quackery.
Matter of fact, I was
told in medical school
any doctor that prescribes
a vitamin by definition
is a quack.
>> One other thing I'd like to
underline is that when we go
through medical school,
the first two years,
or the first year, we
learn a lot about anatomy
and physiology and biochemistry.
And then starting in the second
year, we get to pharmacology.
And what happens is that the
attitude in medical school
is that the physiology
and biochemistry,
well, that's kind of--
we have to know that.
But the real medicine
is pharmacology.
And that is the
orientation of physicians.
And what we are doing
in orthomolecular
psychiatry and orthomolecular
medicine is we're
going back to physiology
and biochemistry rather than
pharmacology.
We assume that the body has
the ability to heal itself
if given half a chance.
And the way that happens
is by supplying the body
with what it needs
and trying to remove
things that are toxic to it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Most people don't
understand schizophrenia.
If a patient tells
the psychiatrist
that he or she is hearing
voices, what does that mean?
Unless the doctor has
heard voices himself,
it has no meaning.
He can't visualize
this happening.
So we thought, first
of all, if we're
going to deal with
schizophrenia,
we have to understand
it's psychology.
And we also said, we will take
hallucinogenic drugs like LSD
and mescaline--
and later on, adrenochrome
and adrenalutin.
We will take these drugs
and see what it does to us.
Then we'll have a much
better comprehension of what
is happening to our patients.
>> We had to take this stuff
ourselves to test its effect.
We found that when it
goes into the brain,
it makes the brain less
able to use its energy.
After inhaling
adrenalutin, Dr. Hoffer
became suspicious of
everyone, took half an hour
to choose between tea or
coffee, tore my robes,
and [INAUDIBLE] give up his job.
[APPLAUSE]
>> This is so
wonderful to see this--
this long overdue
Lifetime Achievement
Award to my great lifetime hero.
I mean, you really
are, Dr. Hoffer.
And I guess I'm going to talk
on behalf of all of us patients.
And I have to try not to cry.
Because see, I'm
already starting.
Because not only have
you given us our lives,
you were the voice
all these years
who said you can get better.
You will get better.
Take these simple steps.
You won't be crippled
by drug side effects.
You've given us a quality
of life that so many of us
were told by the conventional
psychiatric establishment was
not possible for us.
From the bottom of
my heart, Dr. Hoffer,
I send you love
and gratitude and--
and these tears.
I love you very much.
[APPLAUSE]
>> In 1957, we first
reported our findings.
1957.
Until then, I was considered
one of the top North American
researchers.
That's because we never
did anything important.
[LAUGHING]
We published a lot of papers.
A lot of paper, but
there's no value.
But as soon as we began to
publish that we were getting
results with niacin, you should
have seen the world collapse
about us.
They said, oh my god.
These guys are heretics.
>> And the mental
health business,
or their mental
illness business,
is a multi-multi-billion
dollar business.
It generates profits that
are in the stratosphere,
obscene profits.
So, Dr. Hoffer and
his work and the work
of all these
extraordinary doctors
is an extraordinary
threat to that industry.
And I think in their
greater and greater quest
for bigger and bigger
markets, because they've
kind of got everyone
in the States
on Prozac, half the
population, they've
now pushed it to the limit.
Once you start damaging
little children's brains,
I think there's going
to be a backlash.
[CHATTER]
>> Family from Carmel,
their 12-year-old son was
schizophrenic.
And his father, a doctor,
called me and was crying.
And I said, what's wrong?
He said, my son.
I've just been told
by his psychiatrist
that he will never get
well, never get well.
And so when he was given
that horrible news,
he began to spend as much time
as they could in the library.
He ran across the first paper
we ever published in 1957 where
we first described
the use of vitamins
for the treatment
of schizophrenia.
I said, get a hold of some
niacin, and talk to his doctor.
Maybe he will agree
to put him on it.
I said to the son's
doctor, would you
please try this niacin?
Told him what he knew about it.
The doctor was very
annoyed, very hostile.
And he immediately
issued two lies.
He said, first of all,
it'll fry his brain.
Then he said, secondly,
we have tried.
It doesn't work.
If they had tried it,
and it didn't work,
why didn't they publish it?
There was never a
single publication
from them saying it didn't work.
They never tried it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The idea of the
Saskatchewan plan
was to build hospitals that
would be really good hospitals,
where people would be
held until they got well.
They would keep patients
even three to six, 12 months
if necessary.
Then the drugs came along.
They were so dramatic
that psychiatry
began to think we don't
need these hospitals.
Their plan was not
to really build
a large number of smaller
institutions where
they could house them properly.
Their plan was simply
to put them all on drugs
and discharge them.
And for a while, there was an
enormous feather in your cap
if the superintendent
of a hospital
could claim that he was
empty in his hospital
faster than you were.
If you started off the
hospital with 2,000 patients,
and five years later, you only
had 1,000, that was great news.
Where did these 1,000 go?
They went onto the streets.
They went into
terrible nursing homes.
They went into terribly
undesirable places.
>> Once you have schizophrenia,
it's a life sentence.
That's it.
You're never gonna change.
Your probably maybe
going to get worse.
We just have to medicate you.
And then you may be able
to limp along on a somewhat
normal existence, but
totally medicated.
And people don't
like medications.
They have a lot of side effects.
So they go off them.
>> Basically, what we're dealing
with is a culture of life
and a culture of death.
And a culture of life
is to try to supply
the body with what it needs
and to keep away toxic things.
I think the culture of life
is an orthomolecular approach.
The culture of death is one
that focuses on profits.
And that's what
motivates everything.
So it's the financial
situation that
is motivating the
development of the drugs
and the paying dividends
to the stockholders
and things like that.
That's what's important.
That's what drives things.
>> Of course, this is
the future of medicine.
It works.
Number one, it works.
Number two, it's safe.
So why aren't we all doing this?
And I think the bottom
line is it is money.
The pharmaceutical industry
have such a tight hold
on medical training.
So, the average
doctor just simply
doesn't learn this stuff.
And by the time they come
out of medical school,
they've got all this knowledge
about how to diagnose diseases
and which drugs
to use and so on.
And they've often been taught
that particular nutrients just
aren't effective.
You know, sort of
drug versus nutrient.
But of course,
this whole approach
is not about a different
kind of pill for an ill.
It's actually an entirely
different approach.
And then when you couple that
with the fact that you simply
cannot do orthomolecular
medicine in five minutes or 10
minutes, it really requires a
much longer and more detailed
involvement with the patient
to really find out about
their lifestyle.
And also when you find out
that it's relatively easy
to get someone to take a pill,
but to change a behavior is
fundamental as eating, then
that really takes a lot of work.
So doctors are neither
trained in the science of this
nor are they trained
in the practice
of how you would do it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> And now we are in
the era of big pharma.
We have huge companies that
spend billions of dollars
in research and investigation.
Investigation is
not really that hot
because they don't do
much original stuff.
They allow much of
the original stuff
is done for them by
university professors who
don't get paid for it.
So, we are giving them
free research personnel.
But as soon as something
seems to be valuable,
they take out a
patent on it, and they
make the money out of it.
There's no profit today--
and this sounds very
cynical-- there's no profit
today in getting people well.
Our society is
based upon the fact
that we have to have a
certain proportion of people
sick so that we can treat them.
Hope-- you can't
live without hope.
Suicide, high suicide
rate with schizophrenics,
high suicide rate
with depressions.
Very high, very high.
It's always due to
the fact that they
have been not given any hope.
Their hope has been taken away.
But that's one of
the most important
therapeutic principles
we have-- hope.
>> It takes work to
make it work though.
You can't just say, oh you
know, I'll take niacin.
Therefore, I'll be
better in two months.
It's not the way it works.
It's a subtle thing.
You have to do the lifestyle
as well as the vitamins.
When you come out of
it, and you think,
wow, that's amazing,
how that could change.
How that could change.
It's amazing.
You know, it's just fantastic.
So, good old Dr. Hoffer,
he knows what he's doing.
>> As soon as one is introduced
to and learns anything about
the science and the chemistry
behind orthomolecular medicine,
it's so much more logical
than the notion of throwing
synthetic chemicals on top
of already existing chemical
imbalances, that it's amazing.
>> I mean, really, as a
species, we are not well.
And whatever approach that we've
been employing within medicine,
it's clearly not delivering.
And I think that all the
fingers are pointing very, very
strongly at our 21st
century diet and lifestyle.
And I do sincerely hope that
governments particularly
and the medical
profession as a whole
will stop being so blinkered.
Because these
diseases are not going
to be solved by some magic drug.
>> We need radical changes
from the grassroots.
Everybody, we all have
to change in order
to save our bodies, our
Earth, our universe probably.
>> Science is a way of
investigating phenomena
[AUDIO OUT] answers.
It doesn't give us
the final answer.
>> We don't know
anything, do we?
Let's all think about it.
How is it possible for the
Earth to go around the sun?
We're millions of miles away.
What's that fantastic
attraction that keeps us
from flying off into space?
Well, we have laws.
We have the laws of gravity.
We have the laws of movement.
Newton made those very clear.
We have all these laws.
We know that these
things happen.
But we don't understand
why they happen.
I think there is some kind of
unity in the whole universe.
How it came about, I don't
have the slightest idea.
But there is something.
There's something called life
force, this fantastic tenacity
to living which is
hard to understand
>> We've no padded cells here.
We're here for the world to see.
Our job is to press
on with our search
for the causes of
mental illnesses,
to apply our knowledge
quickly as we go along.
Our aim is to get as many long
stay patients out as possible,
to keep new patients
so briefly that they
did get cut off from
family and society, lastly,
to keep them outside altogether.
We look forward to a
day, years away perhaps,
when these great
buildings will no longer
be needed to house backlogs
of long stay patients.
>> And now we have
a new paradigm,
which is called
vitamin as treatment.
We initiated this whole
megavitamin concept.
Our work actually is
the first in the world
to create public
attention to the fact
that vitamins were
therapeutic in themselves,
that you could use them for a
large number of conditions that
were not considered vitamin
deficiency diseases,
and that you'd have to use them
in the right concentration.
There was no--
God didn't say you must only
use thiamine in tiny milligrams.
God said, if you have thiamine,
use it as you need it.
If you have vitamin C,
And that was the major thing.
So, I think that's going
to revolutionize medicine,
starting to do that now.
It led to the
orthomolecular treatment
that arose from the
adrenochrome hypothesis.
And as a result of
this paradigm change,
we now have a treatment
for schizophrenia,
which is not perfect.
But it's awful better--
certainly a lot better
than just using drugs.
So, I think I would hope that
my major contribution one day
will be that I was one of
the pioneers in helping
create the new vitamin
as treatment paradigm.
So I don't have the answer.
But one day, we're going
to have the answers.
And when orthomolecular medicine
has taken over all of medicine,
instead of spending billions
of dollars examining
one drug after
another that's toxic,
we will now start
to look exactly
at each particular
disease and find out
what are the needs for
that particular disease.
That's what's going to happen.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Then the potatoes will contain
a mixture of almost all
the vitamins, but in
very small amounts.
But their particular
lacking in the vitamin Bs.
They don't have enough Bs.
I already have 300 toxic
compounds in my blood.
Will never ever live again
in a pure, free world
unless humanity gets destroyed.
And the best way to
deal with the pollutant
that we have already is
to take lots of vitamins
to act as a safety device.
It helps the liver get
rid of all these toxins.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
You want to come and tell me,
can you handle three of these?
>> Sure.
Well, I'll just
take two for now.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> This is for you.